Gaul and tlte Gauls. xlv

111.

GAUL AND THE GAULS.

1. THE GALL1c PRoviNCE.

THE district upon whose government Caesar entered in the spring
of B.c. 58 consisted primarily of the two Gallie provinceS, Cisalpine
and Transalpine. Cisalpine Gaul ‚was the northern portion of Italy,
which several centuries earlier had been occupied by invaders from
Gaul proper, and was not yet reckoned politically as a part of Italy3
it was a wealthy, populouS‚ and orderly country, the proconsul’s main
dependence for troops and supplieS, and his regular winter residence.
Transalpine or N arbonnese Gaul received its name from its capital,
the Roman colony Narbo. It contained some thriving cities and
peaceful districts; butas a whole it had been but recently brought
under the authority of Rome, and was still essentially a foreign coun-
try. It comprised the whole coast of the Mediterranean from the
Pyrenees to the Alps, having for its northern boundary an irregular
and uncertain line, which separated the territory of the conquered
nations of Gaul from the states which were still free. To these two
provinces was added also Illyricum, which was a source of strength,
but did not receive much of his attention.

‘r‘he authority of the governor over his province was that of a
military commander‚ whose power was not limited by the laws which
protected the citizens of Rome. A few privileged cities or nationS,
such as the old Greek city Massilia, were wholly exempted from his
authority3 but all other parts of the province, including Roman colo-
nies like N arb0‚ were liable to tribute and under the jurisdiction of
the governor, though the rights of Roman citizens were secured to
them. A consular army consisted regularly of two legions; to these
were added auxiliaries, both foot and horse, but the governor had
power to levy new legions as he required them. Thus we find that
Caesar had six legions in his campaign against the Nervii.

The free territories adjoining a Roman province'were in no respect
under the authority of the governor3 but they were regarded as a
legitimate field for his ambition, if there was any excuse for war, and

